---
title: Marten 0.6.0 release notes
pagination_prev: null
pagination_next: null
---

_Under development._

## Requirements and compatibility

* **Crystal:** 1.15, 1.16, and 1.17.
* **Databases:**
  * MariaDB 10.5 and higher.
  * MySQL 8.0.11 and higher.
  * PostgreSQL 14 and higher.
  * SQLite 3.31.0 and higher.

## New features

### Localized routes

Marten now provides the ability to define localized routes through the use of two mechanisms: automatically adding locale prefixes to routes and activating the appropriate locale based on the prefix, and translating the routes themselves. These mechanisms can be used independently or in combination.

For example, the following routes map defines routes that will be prefixed by the currently activated locales and whose paths will be translated using the considered project's translations:

```crystal
ARTICLE_ROUTES = Marten::Routing::Map.draw do
  path t("routes.articles.list"), ArticlesHandler, name: "list"
  path t("routes.articles.create"), ArticleCreateHandler, name: "create"
  path t("routes.articles.detail"), ArticleDetailHandler, name: "detail"
  path t("routes.articles.update"), ArticleUpdateHandler, name: "update"
  path t("routes.articles.delete"), ArticleDeleteHandler, name: "delete"
end

Marten.routes.draw do
  localized do
    path t("routes.landing"), LandingPageHandler, name: "landing"
    path t("routes.articles.prefix"), ARTICLE_ROUTES, name: "articles"
  end
end
```

As highlighted above, the use of routes prefixed with locales can be activated by wrapping route paths by a call to the [`#localized`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Routing/Map.html#localized(prefix_default_locale%3Dtrue%2C%26)%3ANil-instance-method) method. Route path translations can be defined using the [`#t`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Routing/Map.html#t(path%3AString)%3ATranslatedPath-instance-method) method, which assigns a translation key to each route (this key is then dynamically used to generate the route's path based on the active locale).

With the routes map defined above, generated routes are fully localized and vary based on the currently activated locale:

```crystal

I18n.activate("en")
Marten.routes.reverse("landing")         # => "/en/landing"
Marten.routes.reverse("articles:create") # => "/en/articles/create"

I18n.activate("fr")
Marten.routes.reverse("landing")         # => "/fr/accueil"
Marten.routes.reverse("articles:create") # => "/fr/articles/creer"
```

Please refer to [Localized routes](../../i18n/localized-routes.md) to learn more about this new capability.

### Annotations

Marten now lets you annotate query sets with aggregated data. This is useful when you need to "retain" aggregated values for each record in a query set (possibly for further filtering or for making use of the aggregated values when dealing with individual records). This can be achieved by using the [`#annotate`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#annotate) method.

For example:

```crystal
# Annotate the query set with the number of articles for each author.
Author.all.annotate { count(:articles) }

# Get all the authors that have more than 10 articles.
Author.all.annotate { count(:articles) }.where(articles_count__gt: 10)

# Order all the authors by the number of articles they have.
Author.all.annotate { count(:articles) }.order(:articles_count)

# Access the annotated values for each author.
authors = Author.all.annotate { count(:articles) }
authors.each do |author|
  puts author.name
  puts author.annotations["articles_count"]
end
```

Please refer to the [Aggregations](../../models-and-databases/queries.md#aggregations) section to learn more about this new capability.

### Array schema field

Marten now lets you define `array` schema fields that allow validating lists of values, with each value subject to the validation rules of an array member field (such as `string`, `int`, or any other existing [schema field type](../../schemas/reference/fields.md)). 

For example, the following schema allows validating lists of string values whose sizes must not be greater than 5:

```crystal
class TestSchema < Marten::Schema
  field :values, of: :string, max_size: 10
end
```

As highlighted by the above example, the type of the underlying array member field must be specified through the use of an [`of`](#of) option, which should reference an [existing schema field type](#field-types) (such as `string`, `enum`, etc).

Please refer to the [schema field reference](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#array) to learn more about `array` fields.

### Image fields for models and schemas

It is now possible to define `image` fields in [models](../../models-and-databases/reference/fields.md#image) and [schemas](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#image), which allow you to store or validate files that are indeed images. This capability requires the use of the [crystal-vips](https://github.com/naqvis/crystal-vips) shard.

For example:

```crystal
class ImageAttachment < Marten::Model
  field :id, :big_int, primary_key: true, auto: true
  field :uploaded_file, :image, blank: false, null: false
end

attachment = ImageAttachment.first!
attachment.uploaded_file            # => #<Marten::DB::Field::File::File:0x102dd0ac0 ...>
attachment.uploaded_file.attached?  # => true
attachment.uploaded_file.name       # => "test.png"
attachment.uploaded_file.size       # => 5796929
attachment.uploaded_file.url        # => "/media/test.png"
```

### Minor features

#### Models and databases

* [Query sets](../../models-and-databases/queries.md) now support XOR operations when [performing complex queries involving `q` expressions](../../models-and-databases/queries.md#complex-filters-with-q-expressions). Additionally, combining query sets using the XOR operator (`^`) is now also supported (see [`#^ (XOR)`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#-xor)).
* A new [`slugify`](../../models-and-databases/reference/fields.md#slugify) option was added to [`slug`](../../models-and-databases/reference/fields.md#slug) model fields in order to make it possible to automatically generate a slug value from another local model field.
* Query pages (instances of [`Marten::DB::Query::Page`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/DB/Query/Page.html)) now expose a [`#pages_count`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/DB/Query/Page.html#pages_count-instance-method) method that allows to get the total number of pages.
* Related objects are now automatically loaded when accessing backward relations (such as backward many-to-one relations or backward one-to-one relations).
* The ability to retrieve specific records by using raw SQL predicates was introduced. See [Fetching single records with raw SQL predicates](../../models-and-databases/raw-sql.md#fetching-single-records-with-raw-sql-predicates) to learn more about this new capability.
* The [`#prefetch`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#prefetch) query set method now provides an optional `query_set` argument, allowing you to specify a custom query set for retrieving prefetched records.
* A new `#total_count` method was added to the [paginator](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/DB/Query/Paginator.html#total_count%3AInt32|Int64-instance-method) and [page](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/DB/Query/Page.html#total_count-instance-method) objects to make it possible to retrieve the total number of records in the paginated query set, without applying pagination.

#### Handlers and HTTP

* [Session stores](../../handlers-and-http/sessions.md) now make it possible to easily configure when session entries expire through the use of the [`#expires_at=`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/HTTP/Session/Store/Base.html#expires_at%3D(value%3ATime)-instance-method), [`#expires_at_browser_close=`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/HTTP/Session/Store/Base.html#expires_at_browser_close%3D(value%3ABool)-instance-method), and [`#expires_in=`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/HTTP/Session/Store/Base.html#expires_in%3D(value%3ATime%3A%3ASpan)-instance-method) methods. Please refer to [Customizing session expiry times](../../handlers-and-http/sessions.md#customizing-session-expiry-times) to learn more about this capability.
* An alias for the [`#reverse`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/Base.html#reverse(*args%2C**options)-instance-method) handler method ([`#url`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/Base.html#url(name%3AString|Symbol%2C**kwargs)%3AString-instance-method)) was introduced.
* A [Referrer-Policy middleware](../../handlers-and-http/reference/middlewares.md#referrer-policy-middleware) was introduced to make it possible to automatically set the Referrer-Policy header in responses generated by handlers.
* A new [`unsupported_http_method_strategy`](../../development/reference/settings.md#unsupported_http_method_strategy) setting was introduced to make it possible to configure the strategy to use when processing unsupported HTTP methods in handlers. This setting can be used to configure whether such requests should result in 405 Method Not Allowed responses (the default behavior) or 404 Not Found responses.
* It is now possible to use any hash or named tuple to define schema initial data in handlers that use subclasses of [`Marten::Handlers::Schema`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/Schema.html) (in the [`#initial_data`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/Schema.html#initial_data-instance-method) method).
* Incorrect [reverse URL resolutions](../../handlers-and-http/routing.md#reverse-url-resolutions) exceptions now incorporate more details related to missing and invalid parameters.
* The ability to define [specific exceptions handling callbacks](../../handlers-and-http/introduction.md#exceptions-handling) with the `#rescue_from` macro was added to handlers.
* The [`Marten::Handlers::RecordCreate`](../../handlers-and-http/reference/generic-handlers.md#creating-a-record) generic handler now defines a [`#save_record`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/RecordCreate.html#save_record%3ADB%3A%3AModel-instance-method) method that can be overridden in order to customize how the new record is saved from the validated schema data.
* The [`Marten::Handlers::RecordCreate`](../../handlers-and-http/reference/generic-handlers.md#creating-a-record) generic handler now defines a [`#prepare_record_attributes`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/RecordCreate.html#prepare_record_attributes-instance-method) method that can be overridden in order to generate a hash of attributes that will be used to create the new record (this hash defaults to the validated schema data).
* The [`Marten::Handlers::RecordUpdate`](../../handlers-and-http/reference/generic-handlers.md#updating-a-record) generic handler now defines a [`#save_record`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/RecordUpdate.html#save_record%3ANil-instance-method) method that can be overridden in order to customize how the record is saved from the validated schema data.
* The [`Marten::Handlers::RecordUpdate`](../../handlers-and-http/reference/generic-handlers.md#updating-a-record) generic handler now defines a [`#prepare_record_attributes`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Handlers/RecordUpdate.html#prepare_record_attributes-instance-method) method that can be overridden in order to generate a hash of attributes that will be used to update the record (this hash defaults to the validated schema data fields that match the model's fields).

#### Templates

* A new [`localize`](../../templates/reference/tags.md#localize) template tag was introduced to make it easy to localize values (such as dates, numbers, and time values) within templates.
* A new [`underscore`](../../templates/reference/filters.md#underscore) template filter was introduced to make it easy to get the underscored version of a string within templates.
* An alias for the [`url`](../../templates/reference/tags.md#url) template tag ([`reverse`](../../templates/reference/tags.md#reverse)) was introduced.
* The [`for`](../../templates/reference/tags.md#for) template tag now exposes a `loop.length` variable to make it possible to retrieve the total number of iterations in the loop.

#### Schemas

* The [`date`](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#date) and [`date_time`](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#date_time) schema fields now fall back to the formats specified in the [`date_input_formats`](../../development/reference/settings.md#date_input_formats) and [`date_time_input_formats`](../../development/reference/settings.md#date_time_input_formats) settings, respectively, when localized formats fail to parse raw field values.

#### Development

* A new `--log-level` command option was introduced to make it easier to configure the log level to use when running [management commands](../../development/management-commands.md) (see [Shared options](../../development/management-commands.md#shared-options) for more details).
* The [`new`](../../development/reference/management-commands.md#new) management command now makes it possible to generate projects without configured databases when the `--database=none` option is used.
* Projects generated with the [`new`](../../development/reference/management-commands.md#new) management command now include the [Referrer-Policy middleware](../../handlers-and-http/reference/middlewares.md#referrer-policy-middleware) by default.
* The [`new`](../../development/reference/management-commands.md#new) management command now generates a `seed.cr` file when generating new project structures.
* A new [`seed`](../../development/reference/management-commands.md#seed) management command was introduced to make it easy to execute seed files.
* Log entries generated when running the development server ([`serve`](../../development/reference/management-commands.md#serve) management command) in debug mode now include more details about processed requests, rendered templates, and executed SQL queries.
* Database configuration now supports connection strings, which can be useful in scenarios where only a connection string is provided (e.g., via a `DATABASE_URL` environment variable from cloud providers). See [Database settings](../../development/reference/settings.md#database-settings) to learn more about this new capability.
* New [`date_input_formats`](../../development/reference/settings.md#date_input_formats) and [`date_time_input_formats`](../../development/reference/settings.md#date_time_input_formats) settings were introduced to provide additional flexibility in parsing [`date`](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#date) and [`date_time`](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#date_time) schema field values. These settings allow you to define fallback input formats that are used when localized formats cannot successfully parse raw [`date`](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#date)/[`date_time`](../../schemas/reference/fields.md#date_time) schema field values.
* The [`new`](../../development/reference/management-commands.md#new) management command now provides a `--with-image-support` option in order to easily generate new projects with support for [image fields](../../models-and-databases/reference/fields.md#image).

#### Internationalization

* Translations defined in the `config/locales` folder are now loaded automatically by the framework if defined (see [Defining translations](../../i18n/introduction.md#defining-translations) to learn more about the places from which translations can be loaded).
* A new [`i18n.fallbacks`](../../development/reference/settings.md#fallbacks) setting was introduced to make it possible to easily configure locale fallbacks.

## Backward incompatible changes

### Internationalization

* Marten projects now automatically default to using a locale fallback chain that is that set to `["en"]` by default. This means that all the missing translations for a specific locale will be automatically fallbacked to the `en` locale by default. This behavior can be customized by updating the [`i18n.fallbacks`](../../development/reference/settings.md#fallbacks) setting.
