---
title: Marten 0.7.0 release notes
pagination_prev: null
pagination_next: null
---

_Under development._

## Requirements and compatibility

* **Crystal:** 1.17, 1.18, and 1.19.
* **Databases:**
  * MariaDB 10.5 and higher.
  * MySQL 8.0.11 and higher.
  * PostgreSQL 14 and higher.
  * SQLite 3.31.0 and higher.

## New features

### Minor features

#### Models and databases

* Query sets now provide a [`#limit`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#limit) method and an [`#offset`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#offset) method. Those methods respectively allow to limit the number of records returned and to offset the records returned. They act as aliases for the [`#[]` method with a range](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#range).
* The [`#update`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#update) query set method can now be called on model classes directly, thus allowing to update all the records of the considered model with the specified values.
* It is now possible to update only specific columns without running validations or callbacks for a model record by using the [`#update_columns`](../../models-and-databases/introduction.md#updating-specific-columns) method.
* It is now possible to easily create or update records in a single call by using the [`#update_or_create`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#update_or_create) query set method. An [`#update_or_create!`](../../models-and-databases/reference/query-set.md#update_or_create-1) variant is also available for the same purpose, but it raises in case updated/created records are invalid.

#### Handlers and HTTP

* [`Marten::HTTP::UploadedFile`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/HTTP/UploadedFile.html) objects can now be serialized to JSON.

#### Templates

* Most informational string properties (such as `#ascii_only?`, `#blank?`, `#bytesize`, `#empty?`, `#size`, and `#valid_encoding?`) are now available as template attributes for string values and [safe string values](../../templates/introduction.md#auto-escaping).

#### Development

* The [flash store](../../handlers-and-http/introduction.md#using-the-flash-store) can now be accessed from the spec client by using the [`#flash`](pathname:///api/dev/Marten/Spec/Client.html#flash-instance-method) method. See [Flash messages](../../development/testing.md#flash-messages) for more details.
